hey guys I'm going to ask you a
hypothetical question and then things
are going to get less and less
hypothetical pretty quickly what if
there was a simple brutally effective
technology that we could use today to
mitigate the impact of climate change
what if it was ugly what if it created a
shadow in the sky hanging over Greenland
hanging over northern Canada but it
reflected away the sun's light allowed
us to control how much solar radiation
the planet was receiving as a whole but
specifically allowed us to mitigate the
effects of the warming of the Arctic
Ocean allowed us to slow down or stop
entirely the breakup of the Arctic ice
pack it allowed us to stop the breakup
of the mass of ice in the far north that
so crucially involves the release of
methane into the atmosphere from
permafrost in Siberia to a lesser extent
in Alaska and in northern Canada what if
that technology already existed wouldn't
we all be talking about it maybe maybe
not one of the reasons why I think that
technology is not being discussed right
now is that we have a broad-based
commitment completely understandable
towards encouraging a kind of virtue
amongst national governments and even
industries even city governments around
the world where we try to tell people
make the small changes do your part for
example we encourage many governments
try to get rid of coal power plants
which very very difficult for
governments to do even a wealthy country
like Australia Australia has some of the
most polluting the most terrible coal
power plants in the world but Australia
with all its millions with its
bottomless annual budget for the
government finds it very very difficult
to stop using coal or even to reduce its
use of coal currently international
organizations some national governments
and diplomatic cores are trying to talk
to very poor governments about reducing
their use of coal for the greater good
for the cause of climate change etc etc
it's difficult to have those
conversations if you have this type of
brutally effective technology sitting on
the table as an option
and if the cost for employing that
technology is going to fall entirely on
wealthy nations such as the United
States Canada Russia possibly England ok
what's the technology I'm talking about
it's been around since the 1950s people
near-earth orbit satellites you can very
easily have an array of near-earth orbit
satellites that are used as a so-called
geoengineering space mirror fancy term
but the reality is not fancy to deflect
away or control as much of the sun's
radiation as you like does that solve
the problem no not entirely it mitigates
the problem it would crucially help us
control and sustain the presence of ice
in the Arctic Ocean the existence of the
North Pole the you would let us maintain
ice on crucial coastlines to prevent the
breakup of permafrost and with the
breakup of permafrost lets us stop
releasing enormous amounts of methane
into the atmosphere I'm not talking
about industrial production of methane
here this is methane that already exists
in the soil in permafrost soil whatever
whatever you want to say it's locked
currently under ice and frozen sludge in
the world's permafrost and when the
warming of the water and the breakup of
that ice releases that methane in the
atmosphere it has a tremendously as a
feedback loop effect accelerating global
warming it's tremendously dangerous but
as solutions go near-earth orbit
satellites are not elegant it's not
science fiction and I think it's very
interesting that when this problem has
been discussed in newspapers and
mainstream sources they've always
focused on the most outlandish the most
grandiose the most science fiction like
versions of this strategy such as not
having the array in near-earth orbit but
instead having it out at Lagrange point
l1 you don't know this but having a set
of mirrors very very far from the earth
further away than the moon the moon is
very far from the earth you may think
it's close but compared to near-earth
orbit compared to the saddle
that give you your TV signal every day
that's very very far away as much more
expensive they tend to think about
enormous networks that would in a
diaphanous way filter the light coming
to the earth so that we wouldn't even
notice this was happening very elegant
very science fiction what I'm talking
about is ugly it's practical we can do
it now it's much much simpler than the
type of technology that already exists
for the weaponization of a near-earth
orbit you know the use of missiles etc
by orbital platforms we already do
tremendously complex and sophisticated
things in space not going to bother
giving you examples compared to sending
a unmanned exploration vehicle to Mars
this is dirt simple you're talking about
unfolding a metal tine that is itself
much simpler than even having them you
know the solar wings as we call them
generating electricity for other
satellites and the best thing about
near-earth orbit is that if something
goes wrong you can fix it it's close
it's quick if you need to take any of
the satellites down if you to repair
them if you need to replace them you can
do it you can get it done but the result
would not be invisible it would mean
that a boat going past the coast of
Greenland going through the Arctic Ocean
we do actually have a lot of trade now
now there's less and less ice believe it
or not Arctic Ocean trade has been
increasing because those waters are more
and more navigable now than they ever
have been in history or some of our
remote Arctic people's in northern
Canada certainly Siberia sub-areas
relatively densely populated compared to
northern Canada there would be people
every day would see the strange shadow
interfering with the sun's rays they
would be able to observe this technology
as ugly and brutal as it is and that
technology would hang in the sky as a
constant reminder of our shame and of
our guilt that we had to do this that we
had to put pieces of metal in orbit to
reflect away the sun's radiation because
we could not take responsibility we
could not make better use of the
resources that we had
we could not make decisions such as
becoming vegan stopping eating meat
stopping wasting enormous amounts of
resources on torturing animals to death
for food that is unhealthy unnecessary
etc it would be a constant reminder of
the immaturity and irresponsibility of
humanity itself and that may be one of
the reasons why this option is so rarely
discussed but if you google a little bit
you will find there of in both academic
conferences and government meetings
discussing this it is an option that I
think all of the world's major
governments are aware of that there have
been conferences on etc and that within
the next 30 years we're going to have to
discuss and decisively deploy and it
cuts counter to our sense of global
responsibility because it won't be all
the world's governments doing it it may
just be the United States and Canada or
just the US and Canada England I don't
know I mean in terms of political
science relate cooperation with Russia
is not at an all-time high lately but
obviously Russia and Siberia or a really
special concern we're talking about
controlling you know maintaining ice
mass and avoiding Arctic methane from
escaping etc but it would be a small
number of wealthy countries taking on a
budget of many billions of dollars
because everything in orbit costs money
and this doesn't generate any money
unlike bringing your TV signals every
day scientific knowledge is one thing
the social conditions for the production
and dissemination of scientific
knowledge or another it is not with any
sense of a conspiracy theory that I just
want to close this video by emphasizing
the people who are involved with climate
science are human all too human I met
some of them one in particular I knew at
some depth and some length I knew her I
met her mom I met her sister I'm not
even gonna mention what country this
came in I want this to remain anonymous
but I did know personally one scientist
she was a real scientist but she was
engaged full-time in the politics of
climate change he was one of the people
in the small elite who attend the United
Nations meetings that you read about in
the newspaper and
there are global conferences where the
idea of a carbon tax gets debated where
different government resolutions to have
targets for reducing you know carbon
emissions get debated and also where
plans to try to save specific endangered
species get debated those things and
through her I really had a sense of the
social conditions of these scientists
who live this life I met her I met some
of her colleagues but really it was from
her talking about her work life and
talking with her colleagues and talking
about their social lives these people
all ate meat I didn't hear but even one
of them who is vegetarian even though
they know that meet you know it's the
easiest it's the most important thing
you can do to show you care about the
world's environment is to eliminate meat
dairy and eggs from your diet to become
vegan none of them were vegan um they're
all taking flights ten flights a year
partly because they're attending these
political events I understand it's part
of their job but they all knew that the
specific type of upper atmosphere air
pollution from airplanes is of such
importance compared to other forms of
pollution for climate change and they're
doing it anyway they're living with
these contradictions wearing leather
eating meat taking flights driving cars
owning multiple cars owning SUVs and in
terms of their lives you know they're
human all too human it seemed to me all
of them were drinking alcohol it seemed
to be most of them if you know them were
using marijuana if not other drugs like
ecstasy in their spare time scientists
are not angels there are human beings
and it seemed to me like so much of the
talk was about who was cheating on their
wife with whom who were they gonna sleep
with next after they were done cheating
on their wife with her husband with this
person or that person and you know who
was falling in love with and getting
married with the soap opera element of
who these scientists were and what have
you and you know I don't hold any of
that against them I really don't I've
worked in many diverse fields of human
endeavor I've met Buddhist monks and you
know professors of philosophy and you
know political activists at different
levels they're all human beings you know
and they all have these
these problems the in art but I it is
peculiar that this issue of such
tremendous importance has relied on
people who are not politicians and you
don't understand politics very well
taking a set of scientific anecdotes and
trying to package them into a political
program and you could see I mean even my
discussions with her with just that one
scientist you know okay here's an animal
that's going to go extinct because of
climate change is it cute enough that we
can take this and make this into a news
story or make this into a political
cause the attempt to try to package a
factoid into something okay the
acidification of the world's oceans do
you think we can get that on the front
cover of National Geographic magazine
that is like the change in the acidity
of the oceans is linked to the amount of
carbon in the Earth's atmosphere it's a
fascinating issue do you think we can
take that get it on the cover of a major
magazine and then once it's on the cover
the majors matter is what can we do with
this in terms of international
politicking in terms of negotiating
agreements and so on we're all at a
tremendous disadvantage in part because
those people those scientists they're
not army generals they're not elected
politicians they're not career
bureaucrats even in some ways I think
they they're also not media
personalities or masters of you know
manipulating the press or what have you
in some ways they're the worst prepared
people to shoulder the burden of the
task they have and that task is of
trying to break through public and
difference and to motivate people to
make a million changes both big and
small from becoming vegan on a personal
level to committing the budget to making
a transition away from coal power and
yes sadly maybe tragically to committing
to put metal objects in space to reflect
away some of the sun's radiation because
we sacrificed every other opportunity to
solve this problem before it got to that
dire point where that kind of
intervention was really necessary